Yeah, you can use this for gaming,
but also, we're going to use it for
something different.
So let's get out of here for
a second and let's load our project.
Remember, our project is
available in the repository,
that is, github.com, my last name,
Firtman/capabilities.
So if you clone this,
there is a CookingMasters folder.
So what I'm going to do is to open
a local server on that folder,
we can also try it online, but I wanna
show you a local because maybe I wanna
make some changes on the fly while we
are discussing this, maybe we change it.
So I'm going to open Visual Studio Code
now on CookingMasters folder,
I will take that as my root.
CookingMasters, there we are,
it's a Vanilla JS app,
so no library, no framework,
no npm, no build process, nothing.
So we have an index.html,
it's pretty simple, header,
we have a main with a couple of sections,
there are a couple of pages,
you will see it in action in a minute, but
nothing really complicated, just HTML.
Then we have CSS, you know CSS,
so nothing so important there.
I have data.
On data, I have recipes
because this is a cooking app.
The idea is an app that will help
us while we are cooking, okay?
So we are cooking food at night,
at home, and I want an app to help me.
The idea is that because when
we cook we are using our hands,
our hands will get dirty,
I don't wanna use my keyboard or
my mouth or my trackpad at the same time.
So we are going to use capability APIs
to manage that app while we are cooking.
So we can use an iPad,
an Android tablet, or a computer,
put it aside and interact with our app
touchless, that's one of the goals.
Yeah, maybe if I'm using a gamepad,
I'm going to attach the gamepad, yeah, but
we will use other techniques as well.
So let's run it first so
you will understand what this is.
So I'm going to open a web server.
This is how it looks like.
So this is the homepage, Cooking Masters.
We have a couple of suggestions.
We have Argentinian asado as well,
that's a barbecue, okay?
This is the Argentinian meat thing, but
anyway, we can take fish tacos.
So if I click there,
I get into the details.
This is a client-side routing system,
pretty simple, with Vanilla JS.
I have a list of ingredients, and here
comes the tricky part, not tricky, but
the important part, we can start cooking.
And that enters a new mode.
Here I'm using different capabilities,
even some that I haven't mentioned yet,
but we will.
If I click there, and
you can try this on your computer,
you can open this on Chrome,
Safari, or Firefox,
it will work, if I hit Start cooking,
it goes full screen, okay?
So it went full screen.
And now I have, in this case, the steps.
This is step one,
I need to pickle my onions, okay?
And of course, I can go to the next step.
There are some steps where
they have some timers.
For example, in this case, it says that,
yeah, I need to let sit for
at least 30 minutes, and
there is a button there that says, hey,
do you wanna add a timer for 30 minutes?
If I do that, I can click here and
it adds a timer.
Right now it's only for
five seconds, always, just for
us to test this, but
we can change that, okay?
This is hard-coded just because we are
going to use that timer for something, and
I can add more than one timer and for
different parts of the cooking process,
and then on the screen,
I will have those timers.
If we click the timer,
they've been removed, okay?
So that's the app, okay?
So of course, then I finish, and
that's all, that's kind of the app.
So I have a little button there,
top right,
that's a permissions section
where you will see the current
state of the permissions that we will use,
okay?
Make sense?
I will show you the code we made,
this is using the permissions API for
when it's possible, because remember that
permissions API is not available for
every capability.
And for example, for the gamepad API,
the gamepad API is not actually
in the permissions API.
But my gamepad right now is off.
I can turn it on through Bluetooth or
through USB, I have both options.
Both will work, in our case.
It's not the problem, but
I can show you that it works.
Sorry, it works with USB
as well as with Bluetooth.
So if I connect this like so,
At one point it's going to be connected.
So let me put it there.
It's connected because it has a light.
So what's the idea?
The idea, for example,
is that when I am cooking, also,
I have a section here that is really
grayed out with a couple of icons.
One of the icons is actually an emoji,
it's a gamepad.
So the idea is that I can click there,
and now it says it's connected.
So when it becomes alive,
it means connected.
Which means I can now use
this to move things, okay?
So I'm moving now my steps.
And also with the button,
I can get out, okay?
Just one thing, connector that I have.
So now, if I go here, you can see that
it says gamepad is connected, okay?
So just for you to know when
you use a gamepad, the gamepad,
after a while,
goes through some kind of a sleep mode.
So even if it's still the light sensor
this connector, so what you need to do, so
if I restart, now maybe it's disconnected.
The way to connect that is to move
something, to touch something, and
it connects again, okay?
So you just connect it again.
By the way, in JavaScript,
do I need to pick the gamepad as a user?
Do you see any permission dialog?
We didn't see any permission dialog.
The gamepad is one of
the harmless capabilities,
we won't see any permission dialog.
If the gamepad is connected to
the computer through Bluetooth or
through USB, by the way,
it works also on mobile devices,
that's okay, you can use it, okay?
It's like a keyboard, you don't get
permission to use the keyboard, okay,
on a website.
So the same happens with gamepad.
But now let's try to look at
the code because the gamepad API,
it's not so simple as I was saying before.
The gamepad API requires
some little tricks, so
if you go to your scripts,
let's go first to understand this web app.
On app.js, we have a DOM content
loader where everything starts.
We are starting the router, the router is
the one that is managing different routes,
navigation between pages.
Then we have the cooking section
that is available in Cooking.js,
that's the one that is managing
the steps going, next step,
back step, the timers,
everything is there in cooking, okay?
It's just coding, okay?
You will see the code, this is Vanilla JS,
nothing really complicated.
And then we have
a Capabilities JavaScript file.
On the Capabilities JavaScript file,
what we have here is the connection to
every device or hardware that we will
use during the rest of the workshop.
There is a full section here on,
let me look for it,
Gamepad, this is the gamepad section.
So when we are adding an event
listener for gamepad connected and
gamepad disconnected, what we are doing
is just sent him to the console,
the gamepad is connected or disconnected,
and calling Capabilities.load.
Capabilities.load, what
he's doing is marking on
the screen if it's connected or
disconnected every API.
This is kind of a manual work,
because as I mentioned before,
the permissions API is not available for
every feature.
So for every feature, we have
a different code, and here we have,
they go for the gamepad, okay?
Let's try to understand because
it looks scary but it's not so
complicated at the end.
First, we get all the gamepads
with navigator.getGamepads.
In fact,
let me do that in action directly here.
Let's open, I was using Canary.
Here I have Cooking Masters.
Let's open the console.
And let's say,
I'm going to copy that line,
gamepads = await navigator.getGamepads.
If I look at gamepads variable now,
it says, it's an array of four nulls.
And this is the first weird part.
But the weird part is that
even if you don't have
any gamepad connector,
you don't get an empty array.
You get an array of all the possible
gamepads that this OS is supporting with
nulls inside.
In fact, if you have one gamepad,
it will be the first one.
So always,
if you check the first item in the array,
it will tell you if you do have
at least one gamepad or not.
And now it says it's disconnected
because every time you refresh the page,
the gamepad, even if it's connected to
the OS, is disconnected to the web app.
So I just need to press a button or
something, and now we see gamepad
connected, and that means that we can
run this again and see what we have.
Gamepads, and
now the array is not everything null,
we have actually one gamepad.
And if you open the gamepad,
we see that the gamepad
option has an array of buttons,
a vibration, and axes.
If I open buttons, I have in this case,
this particular gamepad has
18 different buttons, and
each button is telling you if it's
pressed, touched, or a current value.
The problem, as I mentioned, is that we
don't have an event listener like click,
tell me when it's click, no.
We have to query this
array on every frame and
then check when that happens.
And this is what I'm doing here.
So let's look at that.
I have a function with the name gameLoop,
okay, that I'm immediately calling.
This function is actually
getting the gamepads and
checking if one particular button,
the first one,
that is the X in the PlayStation
format system, and
then the axes, if they are greater
than 50% to the right or
greater than 50% to the left, and
then setting some booleans in an array.
Why?
Because again, you can say, well, if it's
true, let's call next step, for example.
If I'm going like this,
I wanna go to the next step in the recipe.
But if you do this,
even if it's really fast,
you will get five
executions of the callback.
So you don't wanna move five times.
So that's why I'm waiting
60 frames to check if I
do have a button or not pressed.
So if within the last second we had that
button pressed, we go to a next step.
And of course, you can play with these
values until you're happy with the result,
you need to do some testing.
And you say, I'm talking to the cooking
app and say finish the process,
go to the next step, or
to the previous step.
And at the end,
we request another animation frame and
we keep that game loop working.
Make sense?
So that's how that works.
It's a little tricky to get used with, but
here you have an example that is working.
So again, the idea is that, let me inspect
this, I think the zoom is a little weird.
Okay, like that.
Let's open the Argentinian asado.
First, it's not connected now but,
all right, it is connected, yeah.
See, it's connected or not?
Not sure.
We'll refresh, Cuz I was inspecting this.
Okay, so now you can see it's connected.
And now I'm moving between steps
just touching the gamepad.
Yeah, it's still a physical
device that I'm touching, but
I think it's even more prepared on the
keyboard to receive sauce, for example.
But anyway,
we will improve that a little bit.
But that's how you use a gamepad.
Remember, it can be Bluetooth, and
it can be an iPad, and that also works.
By the way, this is a PS4 device,
I'm not sure
if you have experience with those,
but it has a light.
This is not the official one, I think.
No, it's not from Sony.
But it has a light that it's an LED RGB,
so I can change the color.
This part is touch.
It can also play audio.
Yeah, it can play audio, it has a speaker.
The question is,
do we have that in the gamepad API?
No, the gamepad API is
a high-level API that has
only what is available on every gamepad.
But can we do the rest?
Can we access vibration?
For example, this has an engine also,
a vibration engine.
Well, for that, the answer is yes and
no, or the answer is light green.